So I'm Josh Burkus. &gt;&gt; Provin Kumar. &gt;&gt; Yep. And um among a variety of things um we both participate in the Bootsie project. Um so we're going to talk a little bit about that and why we're excited about it um and why we hope you'll be excited about it. Um uh and what we use it for. So um I mentioned that I was going to talk a little bit about ancient history in this talk. Um and I'm going to talk a little about ancient history so that you will understand why Bootsie is important and why we are so excited um to have it ready to use. So um I mentioned that I started with Linux in the 90s um and one of the the first things you did with Linux distros you working with Slackware etc was you literally compiled everything. I compiled the kernel. I compiled all the applications from CC code. Um compiled the graphical operating system. And if you think if you think um Kubernetes is a hard build now, it's nothing on um oh what was it? X window maker. So um trying to build all that different stuff. And so we all decided that that actually kind of sucked and it took way too long um to build anything or to update your system. So by 2001 with Red Hat Linux and Suzie Linux out in the field we'd moved to the system of operating system packages. Um RPMs later on dev packages came along right and so these were preompiled um application binaries that you could use so you weren't compiling everything yourself and that was a huge improvement. Um, however, managing all these packages became its own problem. And so, a bunch of people put together what's known as config management, right? And originally, the main purpose of config management was simply to manage all the packages you're installing, right? And how you're installing them, what their settings are. And so, you have all of this stuff. And we got Puppet and Chef and that sort of thing to manage all of that. And that was definitely better, but it still wasn't quite good enough because the config management had to do a whole lot of work. keep going. And there were a bunch of problems with this that were chronic problems that all of you folks who are admin or devops will recognize, right? Which is um once you got to a large number of machines, right? If you were trying to deploy a hundred new machines at once, which was a lot in those days. Um I it took forever. Um a certain number of the machines would just end up configured differently or would fail to install for mysterious reasons. Um, those failures were not self-correcting. Some administrator had to shell into them and spend a long time figuring out one wrong and undoing it. Um, I one of the reasons that this was really really slow is that it didn't parallelize very well. Um, I don't know if you remember early versions of Puppet and Chef were strictly serial um and and even later on trying to do it massively parallel. And one of the biggest things that was a problem is no roll backs, right? If the system failed to install or failed to update, then you were taking it out of service and actually doing an overhaul because you couldn't revert back to the last good state. So um then cloud came along and one of the things that we got with cloud which was built on virtual machines and this actually happened before cloud with VMware, right? But then it really got going with cloud and with Amazon and stuff was the idea of deploying images. So instead of um you know having your sort of base operating system as one binary and having a whole ton of other binaries that you install on top of it uh we have one image that we put together that has almost everything that we want for whatever system we're deploying right um and uh you would define that and the advantage of that is you define that once and then you could deploy it multiple times um which was awesome and was a huge improvement and suddenly deploying a hundred systems seemed like nothing at all and we started deploying a thousand systems. Next, however, this still had problems. One is the tools for creating the images themselves were really annoying and hard to use and really really slow. Um the the virtual machine images were huge. So moving them around, copying them, updating them was again really slow, really annoying. This whole cloud approach worked great on public cloud but was really difficult if you were deploying it on your own metal. You had to build a whole bunch of infrastructure, deploy of an OpenStack cluster, everything else to have any chance of making this work on your own metal. And we still didn't have rollbacks. So um then this thing came along um actually in 2014 but I really started using it in 2016 um uh container images right and these were for applications right and suddenly the idea of hey we're not just going to install the base binary for the application but we're going to actually give you the entire application as configured with its dependencies as one binary in a container. Um, and this had a lot of advantages because the build tools for container images were a lot simpler and easier to use and integrated well with tools developers already used. The images were smaller and they built faster. Um, you could deploy them either to bare metal or cloud wherever you wanted to. And importantly for those container application images, you had roll backs, right? Because if the new image didn't install, you could roll back to the previous known good image. So we had roll backs here. So and that's where bootc comes in. So the idea of bootc is let's take that application container principle and apply it to the entire operating system. Right? Take all those advantages that we have for application containers and apply them to installing systems and not just applications. That is the advantage of um those containers are a lot easier to manipulate and move around. Um I and um the boot C application in system manages that for us, right? It helps us build those bootable container images. It helps us deploy them to system images. It helps manage status and updates. And importantly, it supports rollback. So um everybody here is familiar with application container images, right? Um so you know got this whole concept of you got the app and that sort of thing but it's running on the base kernel. So if we want to deploy a system we need to make a slight change to the image and of course it's actually a big change to the image which is we need to actually put a kernel in the image so that it's bootable and it can run itself but otherwise it looks just like an application container. It's a big tarball with metadata. Um it just happens to have a kernel in it in addition to all of the user space code. So, with that preface of what we're doing and why, let's actually show this off. &gt;&gt; No, &gt;&gt; there. There you go. &gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you. &gt;&gt; So, because most of the time live demo doesn't work, so I just recorded it out. Um and then we will actually go and in details like how the things working but the idea is the same. We want to showcase how in the operating system side you can use the same concept as we are using till now in the application container where you specify your image as part of the container file and then you create the container out of it. Then uh distribute that image to a registry. somebody wants to try out they can use that registry and then try it out. Uh and for that purpose uh I'm going to use uh uh something called podman. Anybody know podman here? How many people are actually used it? Nice. Thank you. Um and how many people know about the podman desktop? How many people? Oh, nice. I want a picture of them. Okay. So, um we are going to use those things. Why we are using it is uh I'm using Mac right now and you already know that by default um recently Mac started a project but it's still not in mature state but before that you can't uh build a container image directly on Mac you need a VM even docker use behind the scene VM which uh you can create the container image out of it. So let's see if is it font is okay uh at the back if you people are not able to see it okay it's good enough thank you uh and I can't uh make it more bigger so this is the portman desktop uh dashboard um and uh I have running the latest and greatest version of that. The thing is that I have installed something called extension and uh in the extension I have uh this uh extension called Bootsy extension uh which is I'm going to use during the demo. Um all the extension you can install it. There is a very nice readme files on the uh podman desktop documentation side where you can go and check at the end of the demo. Everything which we are going to showcase is on GitHub. So please do check out and uh if time permits make sure that you do kind of hands-on around it. Um so it's you just need to follow the steps and you are able to do you know their first uh bootable container and then you can easily deploy it and then do whatever the imagination takes you there. Okay. So with that uh let me start with this particular um coding I'm think okay so as we said that everything is in uh in the container file. So the the way we want to create the image the bootc image I would say um the details of the image the specification of the image will be part of this container file. So here you can see what I'm doing is that uh it's and it's a very plain um container file uh which you use I think dayto-day uh to create your containers. So we are setting the repository. uh the the first thing you can notice is that I'm if you go on the top the first thing is the bootc fedora bootc so this is a specific container which contains uh the Linux kernel of the fedora also because we are going to showcase the bootc uh part um the labeling we are doing like we are doing for the container file we are setting up the kubernetes repo uh so set to set the context what we are trying to do is that um we want to have everything as part of the kubernetes controller uh as a bootc image. So once we build this image uh and when I try to deploy that image as part of the VM uh and then automatically the Kubernetes controller supposed to be up and running and all the ports are supposed to be up and running without me doing anything manually and then after that we are going to showcase the update parts and the roll back parts also. So u these are the like basic things I'm going to install um the the the packages I'm using the RPM but you can use the DNF install now because it's now the uh the boots image have the DNF also. So you can use the same uh your old image if you have and then you can actually convert it to the boots image also. So this is the container file. Now I go to codeman desktop. I try to build that image using that particular container file. So I build it. I give the the container file path which I have here and it will automatically take my build context directory where I'm supposed to build and the image name I give. I I already have the image so I'm not going to build it. Here you can see I have this two images. one is tag 1.33 and the other one is the latest one because I want to showcase um the the update and roll back. So the latest is right now is uh cublet or cubernetes version 1.32 and the I have the 32 uh 33 also. So how it automatically updated to 33. So once I have the image uh and then I go to that particular extension bootable container extension here and the image listed here are the boots images only. So I choose the latest one and I'll say that okay I need a disk image out of it. So what it do is that if you see here it um sorry I want to just highlight like how we are actually creating the disk image. So yeah so we can choose any bootc image right now we created this uh cube cube cone demo image and if you can see what kind of a disk image type you want to get as outcome. So you have the option of row disk image. You can use you can even convert it to AMI and directly upload it to your AMI um on Amazon. Uh you can have the Qout to use the liver and you can have the virtual hardick uh and then you can have the Anaconda ISO and the GCP image and all those kind of things right and then virtual image uh disk image which is you can use with the Windows. So I'm using the row because uh the on the Mac I can directly start the VM using the row image. So I gave the u the image and then I try to use the which of the output directory I want to use where the disk image supposed to be present. So I choose that I am choosing the row disk image uh the platform. Yes. So uh here in the codeman desktop you can actually even uh I have the M1 series which is ARM based. So you can even use same thing with the for if you want to create the image for x86 and 64 also which is fine. And then I'm going to use a build config file. So build config file in uh in the bootc side it's a very simple file where you can actually consume like you can put like okay which user I want to create uh what is the password what is the key of that user. uh anybody use uh cloud in it? Uh it's kind of the same um things like okay before um creating the disk image I need to have access way to access that particular running VM. So I I create I put all those details in that. So I put the very basic thing like added user to the uh to the wheel group have the user as a core and all those kind of things. So, and then I'm going to build that image and it takes some time but it's built successfully. Once I have that image, you can see it is listed in the disk image size and I can run it and it will create a virtual machine uh in my Mac. I use the username as core because I set that as a core and then uh I have the virtual machine up and running and you can see that where it is. It is in the there is another component called boot cvms. You can check the boot cvm and you can see if it is you can just start it on the top you can see is starting and just after some time it is running you can even get the console. So I SSS to that VM which is still running locally and then the first thing we will try to do is that try to see what is the current current status of our VM. So you can see here since uh we booted from so if you see now we are since we are booting from a image it is very very easy to you know uh kind of a put another layer of different image so that the update will be very easy. So now right now it's this this is the current status because I use that image and then uh this is the tags I have on my qu side where I put this 1.22 to 1.33. So now just to showcase what is the current version of the in the VM of the cubelet. So you can see it's a 1.32 that's what we used and then the the next thing which we'll try to do is that we also try to see if everything is running. So if you can see I didn't do anything no configuration and every ports and everything is already running. So it's like this is a kind of you can say golden image if you want to distribute internally you can give it and people can directly consume it and then just start using it right and it's not like it works on my machine and it's not going to work on yours because everything is in the specification in container files and then you can just give it the same thing like uh the the container ecosystem actually changed. So now what I going to do is that I'm going to do bootc update. So how it will actually able to get the image because I have two different u tags already the latest is going to.13 and and my image is actually always checking the latest tag. So if anything change happen in the latest tag it's going to pull down the latest tag again and going to update it. So it's apply uh the updates and then we again check the status. You can see what happens is that it's not like as soon as you get the update, it's going to be applied as soon as possible. But what it do is that it stage the image first and uh it will give you the information that this is the stage image. This is the updated image. If you want to use that image, you have to reboot it. Otherwise, you are still going to use the same one. There is another option called apply where it will not show like there without the user interaction it will automatically update the uh update the system. So now I'll just need to reboot the system because then how it will going to be apply the um the updates and then when I again log log back in on that VM and I'll try to see what is the status of the boot. Cy right now you can see I'm going to have the new version of the image the booted one which is going to be different um digest and the I now have the present of the roll back image. So what happens if I um somehow the current system is not even coming up. So it will automatically go back to the roll back one and make sure that it's up and running. So again I'll check the what is the version of the cubeadmium cubectl whatever it is whatever the cubernetes package I have and you can see now I already shifted to 1.33 right and you can check even the ports also which is already running so you are actually kind of migrated from one version of the kubernetes to another without disrupting anything only the disruption is the the the reboot time which you have which is kind of a minimal so yeah you can see the the ports are running Everything is there and now the next thing is the roll back which is also quite easy. Now assume that uh we are trying it out like 1.33 they have the issue and now we want to uh kind of meditate that then what we can do we can roll back that particular previous version which have the 1.32 image. So it's again it's very simple command we roll back it and it says that next boot you have the roll back image. So you you can see it's a roll back image is already there and then when we reboot it um it will be going back to the the roll back image. So yeah so just after the reboot I SSH I again tried to check the cubectl version. You can see it's back to the 1.32 where we are started. So that's how this is the end to end uh kind of a demo purpose where we showcase how the things actually working with the with the boot state. Um I so we had a container file we created a build uh using the the podman and the we have the bootable container image which has the 1.32 right then we converted it to the disk image we deploy it using the virtual box but that's deployment can be anywhere you can have the deployment on any cloud providers actually from build to converting the image the disk image you can convert any type of image you And then what we did is that as part of the update we again build a container file which has the newest version. We push back to the container registry. We use the boot C update command and you have the latest version. Right. And the roll back is we actually did the roll back command and we have this container registry and it is back to this. &gt;&gt; Yep. So if you want to try that out for yourself um uh there is the link to Pine's re repository where he has all his scripts that he used for that demo um for you to go ahead and try out &gt;&gt; and if you want to use in the CI/CD way like you don't want to use in your laptop and all those kind of things in the same repository we have a github workflow file where every PR which I'm putting in there it actually creating end to end um the new disk image the new container image which is the bootable container image and if you check the packages there you can see that there are already images which are present uh when I started this particular &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So you see so the advantages here for bootc update is you aren't choosing individual components or choosing to install or update individual packages and that sort of thing. Um, one thing we couldn't really demonstrate in this demo is um, we had uh, some interns I think it was um, who actually worked on algorithmically making the image laying super the image layering super efficient so that those updates change a minimum number of bytes for an average system. And so it's a very efficient way to update the systems. Um, there's no possibility of getting a partial update, right? There's no possibility that we might say install the 133 version of the Kublet but still just 132 version of Kubadmin and then have that particular node not function. It can't happen. Um and if the update fails for some reason it rolls back, right? If it won't start up, it automatically rolls back. If it startups and doesn't function, you can roll it back with one command. &gt;&gt; So you are mostly updating it like you update your phones, right? You have update, you click on update. What it do is mostly get the image which is the layered image and it update it. If it is not doesn't have issue, it roll backs to the previous one. &gt;&gt; Yep. So the next thing for you to do is to try out bootc for yourself. Um the um the easiest way to get started with bootc is through podman desktop. So you install podman desktop which is available for Linux, Mac and Windows uh desktops. um and install the bootc extension and then play around with creating your own system images um and trying to deploy and bootable images and trying to deploy them. It's really easy. &gt;&gt; So in podman desktop we have uh some of the uh kind of a uh learning uh documents also uh you can follow step by steps to get the podman uh sorry the boots images. &gt;&gt; Yep. And then the other thing to do obviously is to join our community. This is an open source project. Um, so we want you to participate. We want you to try it out in your environment. We want you to give us feedback. We want you to file issues when things don't work. Um, and of course, um, if you are prepared, you know, we want you to contribute to the project, right? So, not just bug reports, but testing on different platforms, helping us with documentation, if you write Go code, contributing directly to Bootsie itself. Um, I, you know, we can use it all. So, um, just go ahead and leave that up, um, because we actually have a few minutes for questions. So, questions. Yeah, already we have the roll back and all features in the Kubernetes images itself. What is the uh difference between adding the Linux machine into the application itself? it won't get the more load uh as far as the OS is concerned. &gt;&gt; Uh sorry which which project are you talking about in the cubernetes booty? &gt;&gt; No no no &gt;&gt; uh cubernetes cubernetes already having the autoscaling and roll back update everything we are doing. &gt;&gt; Okay it's uh so you are talking about like &gt;&gt; containers application. &gt;&gt; Yeah the container rollbacks is a different here we are talking about the complete operating systems roll back. It's not only the one component which you are rolling back. It's complete operating system going to the so assume that you have a package like uh any dependency which you have and if it is going to conflict with other dependency okay &gt;&gt; you have to manually roll back that dependency right now otherwise you are not able to do it &gt;&gt; on the system side on the OS level side not on the Kubernetes side. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Hello. Can can you run a complete uh operating system including graphical user interface and stuff like Nyx OS similar or &gt;&gt; yeah like can I use it for my day-to-day uh usage &gt;&gt; I think the eco is there any &gt;&gt; yeah so &gt;&gt; um actually the project to look at for that is bluefin Linux which is what I actually use on my laptop um And um and that's a desktop operating system based on image up updates etc. Um and the important thing for this for desktops is it makes it very easy to create forks. So like I run called Blofin DX which is designed to be a developer desktop with a lot of tools in it for building application containers and stuff. &gt;&gt; Uh we have a question we had. So when you build that image uh exactly what you use for the Kubernetes is it uh kind uh K0 K3S or it is fullblown Kubernetes with the all the storage providers and all. &gt;&gt; So right now the way I'm using it is mostly the RPMs of the Kubernetes no kind nothing as of now. So it's a basic um packages which I'm using on top of my Fedora box uh to create the image out of it and that's it. So once you have up you have the the host is Fedora and then you have the Kubernetes package on yeah is there a CentOS booty image? They have &gt;&gt; uh also how does it work when we have some cloud dependency for example when we built our AWS AMI from Santos we have some NVME unit script which would uh mount NVME which runs sometimes before cloud in it then we restart cubelet and all those things how does that come into picture when we have &gt;&gt; so you can actually so it's a container image your cloud init file if you really want to have you can actually make it as part of that container image itself you can kind of add to that image. So as soon as you create the AMI, it's already have that particular cloud in it file. You don't need to pass the metadata. So all the the the things which you required is part of the uh &gt;&gt; and when we build incremental builds for AMI with boot C is that builds also faster because uh like the updates change like we are changing the cublet or docker runtime version. So when there is a new image creation is the new image curation version also faster with bootc. &gt;&gt; So new image you mean uh the the boot C image which get to be updated on the AWS side. &gt;&gt; Yeah. To the AF. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So that whatever the layer is supposed to be it's goes to be updated only the SLC part. I I forgot to mention it's a immutable system. Only the SLTC part is what is going to merge. So your configuration which is already there that's not going to change but your packages level and all those dependence going to be updated. &gt;&gt; So one more question I think &gt;&gt; hi &gt;&gt; uh so uh you have explained about single node so how it work for uh data plane as well as a worker node how like how do you do you have some automation where or some kind of setup where you can upgrade both to together because you can't just upgrade one and it will break the dependencies. So you have solutions for that. &gt;&gt; So right now this you can see this is a image right I'm just showing on the single node uh but this is a um container image right. So how you are right now orchestrating a single container image to the multiple way the same way you can do it here you can build your own CI pipeline where you can mention okay these are the host which are using I just need to be you if I build a image like I have a gold image assume that with version one and I create a version two image now I want to update all my fleet onto version two you can just uh use any other toolings which can actually execute all your nodes this bootc update and it automatically update all the components all the VMs fleet to new version two. &gt;&gt; So my question was something in the in the uh uh it has SSH enabled. So do you have anible script where all the bootcies will boot to upgrade together or something so that we'll have minimal downtime where all the nodes will come up uh at the same time something of that sort like all the upgrade as well as roll back will will in will be in sync. Um, &gt;&gt; yeah. &gt;&gt; Can I have Yeah. So for your infrastructure, you don't actually want them to go all at once. You want to do a rolling update, right? Um, and so this would be part of a rolling update, right? Where you take down because when you take one down, any workload that's running on that one, right? Even if it's just a very quick reboot, any workload that's running on that one's going to stop, right? And so you actually want it to be part of your automation where you say drain the node and then update the node um and then drain the next node and update that one. Okay. And we are out of time um so if you have further questions um uh catch us out in the hallway or obviously on Slack uh Bootsie channel on CNCF Slack. Um and thanks very much for coming.
